.TH NE 1 "by Sebastiano Vigna and Todd M. Lewis" "ne" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
ne \- A nice editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ne [options] files
.TP
Options:
[\-\-help]
[\-\-]
[+[N]]
[\-\-utf8]
[\-\-no\-utf8]
[\-\-ansi]
[\-\-no\-ansi]
[\-\-no\-config]
[\-\-no\-syntax]
[\-\-keys key\-configuration\-file]
[\-\-menus menu\-configuration\-file]
[\-\-macro macro\-file]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBne\fR is a free text editor that runs on (hopefully almost) any UN*X
machine.  \fBne\fR is easy to use for the beginner, but powerful and fully
configurable for the wizard, and most sparing in its resource usage.

This documentation is incomplete.  The Texinfo/info/HTML/PDF documentation is the
authoritative source (try \fBinfo ne\fR or \fBinfo \-f ne\fR).
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.I "--help"
Prints a help message.
.TP
.I "--"
Next token is a filename.
.TP
.I "+[N]"
Moves to the N-th line of the first file, or to the last line, if N is missing.
.TP
.I "--utf8"
Use UTF-8 I/O.
.TP
.I "--no-utf8"
Do not use UTF-8 I/O.
.TP
.I "--ansi"
Use the built-in ANSI sequences.
.TP
.I "--no-ansi"
Never use the built-in ANSI sequences.
.TP
.I "--no-config"
Skip reading the menu and keyboard configuration files.
.TP
.I "--no-syntax"
Disable syntax-highlighting support.
.TP
.I "--keys key-configuration-file"
Use the specified keyboard configuration file.
.TP
.I "--menus menu-configuration-file"
Use the specified menu configuration file.
.TP
.I "--macro macro-file"
Execute the given macro after startup.
.SS USAGE
Start \fBne\fR, then use escape, escape-escape or F1 to access the menus.
.SS BUGS
Please send bug reports to Sebastiano Vigna <vigna@dsi.unimi.it> or Todd Lewis <utoddl@email.unc.edu>.
.SS AUTHORS
\fBne\fR was originally written by Sebastiano Vigna. Todd M. Lewis added
several new features. Daniele Filaretti helped with syntax highlighting.
